You opened your new book talking about
an Apple ad from the spring of 2024 that
you called extraordinary. Can you
describe it for me?
>> It consisted of all the paraphernalia of
human creativity, a piano, art brushes,
other musical instruments, all being
crushed by a giant kind of press like
device. It was all of sort of human
achievement and and cultural production
all produced and crushed into one tiny
little thing.
>> The most powerful iPad ever is also the
thinnest.
>> You know, Freud once said that uh jokes
are always that which tell us what we
really mean. And in our time, I think
it's advertisements. And the truth
revealed was this sense that the very
nature of humanity is being extracted
and and commercialized. In some ways,
we're the resource being being mined.
[music]
This week on Bold Names, we've got Tim
Woo. He's a professor at Columbia Law
School, and he's usually arguing on the
side of breaking up big tech companies.
Yeah, that's right, Mims. He was a key
architect of the Biden administration's
plans to promote more competition
between US businesses, and he has a lot
to say on how companies should be
regulated. He's recently put himself
back into the spotlight by publishing a
new book called The Age of Extraction.
In it, he articulates his point of view
on all of this, which is that if we
don't check the power of big tech, we
might all be in trouble. I think most of
our audience is familiar with big tech
platforms, whether it's Amazon, Google,
Meta, Apple. But, you know, there's
something interesting in your new book,
The Age of Extraction. How tech
platforms conquered the economy and
threatened our future prosperity, and
you paint a picture of how these
platforms actually have their roots in
the ancient town square. Can you explain
that?
>> One of the things I think it's important
to realize is there have always been
essential platforms in every society.
Things have to happen somewhere. And
long ago, you know, like in ancient
Greece, it was the city square. Uh in
Persia it was the bizaar. We had
markets, agricultural markets all
through Europe. You know, you had Main
Street in the United States. There's
always been a place that commerce,
culture, in some ways democracy or or
government depend on a public space. Uh
the difference is how those spaces are
owned, who owns them, and who are the
beneficiaries. And I think that's
something that has radically changed in
our times.
>> Well, let's follow up on that because
what's different about today's platforms
and how they operate? I think the main
difference
uh is in business model or even the
sense that they have a business model
are these private entities. We have
entered an age and frankly it was Bill
Gates who first really got this idea
that you could have a space. His was the
the early Windows operating system that
would be incredibly convenient that
would be the place everything happens
that you know in some ways would be this
extraordinary
agent of of catalytic economic activity
but then the platform would take all the
proceeds. And I think that model is is
really key to understanding the times we
live in.
>> You know, I'm curious when you talk
about tech platforms, what role do they
play in our current economic era?
>> I mean, I think they're both essential
and extractive.
So, you know, try going a week without
using Amazon, Google, Apple, Facebook.
They've won the war of convenience. Yet
at the same time they have perfected the
business model that in the book I talk
about not unlike a casino. It doesn't
really matter what you're doing there.
Uh in the end the platform is always
going to win uh that they extract fees
and money. They extract attention time
to sell to advertisers extract data to
build and make their products better.
It's certain like like in the casino
they don't care what's going on. They
care that you're here. But the trade-off
is we get a lot uh we get a lot of
stuff. You can obviously have things
show up at your door. You know, we've
been living with this for a long time.
It's familiar obviously to everybody,
but the question is what kind of bargain
have we actually struck? It really kind
of sounds like what you're painting is
almost kind of two worlds. You've got
there's these platforms that are
extracting uh value and then you've got
these businesses who become dependent.
Uh you've got consumers who are
dependent. You've got employees who are
dependent. So there's almost two sides
to this.
>> Yeah. I think that's a good way of
putting it. One of the risks that I
think we run is an economy which is
essentially divided in two the platforms
which have extract the value not only
from consumers but also from all the
dependent businesses either entire
sectors of the economy news media um uh
being a being a good example um
publishing industry uh you name it every
kind of sort of business in the United
States becomes dependent upon the
platforms and then of course consumers
is like we can't deal without them and
then the middleman basically making all
all the money and it's a different kind
of economic problem. This is all about
not only consumers but also producers um
all being caught in this sort of web
where they're all paying and so you have
dependent business and consumers are on
the losing side. Um, now obviously
they're not going to take all the money,
but it's enough to make kind of over
time become this almost like a tax on
the economy.
>> So it wasn't always this way, right? I
mean, I can remember a time when there
was so much optimism in the early days
of the internet. You know, this is going
to be this incredible flattening
enabling platform where everyone can
share their ideas, make money, connect
with whoever they want. Why did that
vision fail to pan out? Um I think you
know there was a certain amount of
idealism. I look at my old stuff from
those days and I think many of us sort
of were kind of caught up in the
enthusiasm but I think a lot of it had
to do with a fundamental failure to
understand platform power. Um those days
the 90s and early thousands were built
on Microsoft which had been humbled by
the justice department. The Justice
Department has charged Microsoft with
engaging in anti-competitive and
exclusionary practices designed to
maintain its monopoly in personal
computer operating systems. It has
restricted the choices available for
consumers in America and around the
world.
>> And also on top of the telephone
networks and broadband which were under
net neutrality and were strictly limited
what they could do by virtue of being
federally regulated. So you had one big
player that was cowed by uh the
antitrust folks who'd really put them
through it. That's Microsoft. And the
others that antitrust action had
happened before. But the point being
they were heavily regulated to carry all
traffic equally.
>> Yes, that's right. And on top of that,
the early internet uh built up. I also
think there were many of us who
fundamentally believed that there was
something
just internally different about places
like Google. I went back and read
Google's IPO letter when they went
public and you it's extremely earnest.
It talks about how fundamentally they
want to make the world a better place
and I think they kind of believed it at
the time. I don't have the conspiracy
theory that um you know they had this
secret plan and we're always going to
take it. But they did also want to be
billionaires.
>> Uh and also I think you know Google they
make a lot of money. Um but when you
listen to them talk they they feel like
they are thinking thoughtfully about how
they can help connect people with
information and and and grow an
ecosystem of ideas along with connecting
buyers with sellers. Right? So there's
some value there. Right.
>> Look, I I don't I don't think that
search is inherently evil. I do think it
is um unfortunate that we have a
monopoly in search who has preserved
themselves at the cost of competition
and that frankly just extracts a lot
more money than at this point it's
worth. Um and I say that uh it's just
basic monopoly economics. you know once
you have established your market control
that you're going to price higher. Now
their way of pricing is is advertising
to us and also the prices they charge
their advertisers. you know, they're
very innovative until a certain point.
But in search, that technology is long
since commodified.
>> Platforms like you're describing, they
enable buyers and sellers, but as you
just alluded to with Google, at some
point that enabling of connecting the
buyer and the seller becomes extraction.
>> Uh, so let's look at an example of this
in the real world. Let's talk about the
Amazon marketplace.
>> So what are you seeing there? I think
the Amazon marketplace around 2012
really was an extraordinary place that
was going very far in the direction of
delivering on that promise of making in
a sense giving an opportunity for
everybody to make it rich. It was the
world's largest marketplace. It was a
great on order fulfillment and the
margins they charge people were
reasonable. I think around 17% to 20% uh
to sell on the marketplace and it was I
would say uh an engine of mass
prosperity an important engine of mass
prosperity so that was like you know how
the internet was supposed to to be um I
think the story is in some ways begins
with hope and then leads in a much
darker direction as Amazon you know
creates a dependence
uh makes businesses feel they have no
alternative make consumers, many
consumers feel they have to be there or
nowhere. They can't quite get the same
stuff other places and then they just
ratchet their fees up and up and up and
up. The amounts now there are different
estimates, but many sellers are spending
over 50, some 60% of their margins on on
Amazon. It's much harder to make money
and it's lost that sense that it's, you
know, a sort of beacon or a platform of
of opportunity. I mean that said, a
platform like Amazon
lowers the barriers to entry for a small
seller to almost nothing. I mean, right,
they will give you a place to sell.
They'll coach you on taking pictures.
They'll coach you on making sure that
you rank in their algorithm. They will
do 100% of the logistics for you. You
just got to get goods into their
warehouses. I mean, isn't that a good
thing? I mean, I think Amazon first of
all deserves a lot of credit for the
what it has built and I also think that
Amazon's success and the importance of
it shows just how incredibly important a
platform is to a flourishing economy.
But what Amazon is no longer doing that
it once did was being an agent of in
some sense truly providing opportunity
for medium and small-sized businesses to
make to make a real fortune and and be
an agent of balancing in the economy. I
mean I think there's one thing that most
people agree on our economy is no longer
balanced and the big guys have more and
the little guys have less. And you know
a key issue in that is exactly how much
Amazon and the other platforms which
businesses depend on how much is their
take. And that that is that is my my
quarrel is Amazon. It's not their no one
would be upset about their fulfillment
and no one would deny Amazon deserves to
make some money. I I think we keep
hearing some words here that I think
that so there's a pattern here big big
right like there's a role of scale that
comes with that these gives these
companies uh power and strength and I'm
curious what tactics uh attracted your
attention what tactics have big tech
firms used to maintain their their
market power
>> yeah I mean I think that's part of the
challenge I would think differently if
there was robust competition but I've
come to feel that in many of these areas
um just like in ancient times there
wasn't room for 10 Greek agoras in
Athens you know there's a few businesses
in any economy where there will not be a
large number of them and they will be
essential to the livelihood even the
culture and the prospects for democracy
uh in that in that space and their share
of the take is something we need to keep
an eye on and that That's that's I
guessly what it comes down to in my
view.
>> I mean there's some benefits to scaling
though, right? It lowers consumers and
the balance.
>> Yes, I completely agree. I'm not one of
these people deny the benefits of scale.
In fact, I think that's what we've seen.
But if you believe in the balanced
economy,
I think you have to accept that some
things like the railroad system, like
the electric networks, like the selling
platforms are going to be scale
businesses. And if you want any hope for
the things on top, you have to control
how they function and how much their
take is.
>> Right. And and we're going to get to
that balance shortly. But while we're
thinking about scale and ambition here,
I mean, one of the things you write
about is how these big uh especially
tech platforms have gotten into the
content business. And it seems like, you
know, more and more day by day, right?
Amazon bought MGM Studios a few years
ago. Apple spent billions producing film
and TV shows. customers like this
sometimes. Um, but it in your book you
argue it has its downsides, right? So,
what is this push into content and media
by these tech cons uh platforms mean for
the consumer?
>> You know, I think it's been fascinating
to watch and the uh assumed wisdom had
always been that when a company that has
a perfectly good business starts buying
media properties, it's a clear sign that
things have gone downhill. [laughter]
And it usually
That was the the the clear assumption
and usually it meant that like the the
the son had inherited usually the father
or the grandfather had this great
business model. You know people alive in
uh back in the 80s and 90s may remember
that Sony which had a great business
making electronics decided to start
buying American movie studios.
>> Last action hero was a good one.
>> Got to catch the red eye.
a series of uh generally terrible movies
now and then.
>> Come on, that was a [laughter] great
movie.
>> Some some good ones. Um the
[clears throat] movies were not always
uh the most successful, but I think no
one there's less doubt about the wisdom
of the of the of the acquisitions. This
shows something very deep and profound
about the change of business models. And
you know if I I'll just say a word about
that the platforms
you know they're less interested in
selling you something by the because
they facilitate conduct and more in the
business of hurting. You just sort of
have to have people there. And so one of
the things that the platforms did over
the last 10 years was much less any
invention of great new technologies or
you know brilliant breakthroughs. you
haven't really heard much of genuine
technological uh innovations. It's more
about a lot a real big bet on human
laziness and frankly couch lock. The
sense that once you get used to things
and if everything is where you are,
you'll be very unlikely to leave. I
mean, I don't know if you've ever had
that feeling where you consider buying
something on a like a site that's not
Amazon or you try to give it a go on
some other thing and then after a while
you just decide it's too much of a pain
and come fleeing back.
>> You got to put your credit card in, you
got to put your address in. It's like a
there's all these little barriers,
right?
>> You know, they business people or
business professors call it switching
costs. Um, I would just call it a long
bet on couch lock. The idea is to build
a kind of a cocoon of conveniences such
that everything you could ever want is
in one place and you never leave.
>> You know, one of the through lines in
the book that I thought was really
really interesting was talking about how
modern tech owes uh a lot to the
previous generation's efforts to enforce
antitrust laws, especially when it comes
to IBM and AT&T. What did you mean by
that? So in the 1970s the United States
was dominated by two major tech
monopolists AT&T IBM and in fact most
countries were like that and most of the
countries in the 70s following kind of
industrial policy theory just tried to
support the big companies and and
hopefully win a little bit like a like
uh Boeing and aerospace or uh you know
see this as an international
competition. The American approach was
very different. We broke up AT&T and we
tried to break IBM and made their lives
miserable for about 13 years. And in
that space in the 70s and 80s,
>> yeah.
>> And in that space, if you look carefully
at the history of tech,
all the important companies um in the
'9s got their start, Microsoft, Apple,
and so on. That's when they got their
start kind of around these big giants.
Then you had the big case against
Microsoft. Um, and the big Microsoft CA
uh case, you know, humbled Gates and
Microsoft, forced them to operate their
platform more neutrally.
>> Really scared them internally. I mean,
they've been public about that since
people who've since left.
>> Yes. U I remember once um sort of
cornering Bill Gates at a cocktail party
and asking him about it and he he said
that um uh he said he'd actually never
lost anything before really before that
case.
>> So is it a cycle where just over and
over again you get these dominant
platforms and then they get humbled and
that makes way for the next thing?
>> Uh yes, although I think it's a I think
government has to do it. In other words,
I don't think it's inevitable because I
I think monopoly is very good at finding
ways to defend itself and among the best
ways is to recruit the government to
defend it. Um and so it takes frankly at
least in the United States has taken
strong government action. That's one of
the reasons when I was um when I worked
in in government in the White House, we
were so focused on trying to you know
pressure and and [snorts] bring
antitrust cases against the tech
companies. Our fundamental goal was to
sort of prompt industrial succession. We
wanted pressure on the companies so they
would find it less easy to defend
themselves so that whoever their
successors may be may may come along and
have their moment.
>> Yeah. I I'm curious, you know, what are
the lessons of IBM and AT&T
kind of inform your thinking about how
our current big tech players should be
treated as we look at this next frontier
of technology with artificial
intelligence? Because when you talk
about scale, they're huge and scale
really matters with AI, with all that
data, right?
>> Yes. Um I think in terms of the
long-term
health of the tech industry and
indirectly therefore of the US economy
um that it's very important for AI to be
a challenge to the tech platforms.
Right now, it I think it's often
presumed that the AI platforms are just
going to kind of help the tech platforms
or be their friends. from the
perspective of sort of a historian who
thinks that industrial succession is
very important the
moment where AI turns against big tech
if they become sort of allies and it's
just you know open AI Microsoft and and
Google and maybe they are allowed to
acquire each other I just think the
industrial power is locked in a way that
becomes very extractive for the whole
economy so I'm very into the idea of
provoking a tight between AI and big
tech.
>> How do you propose we change the playing
field so that um these big existing
platforms can be uh something more than
tools of wealth extraction.
>> So one thing I I think we have to
recognize we and I I think we do
understand we have a p problem um with
the extractive power of the major
platforms and I think one that the last
15 years suggests is not going to
magically disappear. First of all, I
think we need to empower the rights
holders and businesses that are
dependent on the platforms. So, I would
make it easier, for example, here's a
good example. I make it easier for news
organizations to band together to
negotiate. I would make it easier for
rights holders, copyright owners, and
others to sort of assert their rights
just in interest of making more of these
proceeds go to more parts of the
economy. I would subject the platforms
to rules that um based on net neutrality
rules. my uh previous life that force
them to not be in some markets
themselves and not prefer their own
products and also um uh not discriminate
among the businesses that operate on
their platforms. Um the most radical
would be trying to set or limit the
prices that the platforms charge for
their services. I'm not that there's a
troubled history of of price regulation,
but I think everything should be on the
table if we feel that the extractive
potential is too big. And then finally,
what I said earlier is I think we do
need to provoke a fight between AI and
and um the major tech platforms. I think
the US economy is kind of based on a
model of constant combat and the idea of
uh good policy in this area is basically
always to be stirring up fights so that
the different parts of the economy are
controlling each other. Um that's in
fact one of the goals of the antitrust
law is to keep everybody at each other
to some extent to try to keep people
lean. So those are some of the measures
I think would be really important
>> restore some balance. Yeah. Sounds like
what you're saying is we should all want
in the battle between Google and OpenAI,
we should all want Sam Alman to win
>> or we should want there to be a real
battle. And I guess we should want Open
AI to win. I we don't what we don't want
is for Google to win it the easy way,
which is, you know, either to buy Open
AI, not hopefully
this administration wouldn't let that
happen, or to just make it impossible to
get to them. Now obviously Microsoft is
uh OpenAI's uh backer so that helps but
I would like OpenAI to really emerge as
its own power that challenges uh
everybody in this economy and forces
them to get better or surrender the
throne.
>> Let's talk about the Trump
administration. You were in the Biden
administration helping with industrial
policy um using antitrust in in that way
antitrust laws and and really uh
influencing kind of that broader debate.
Now you're watching from the outside. Um
I'm curious what you think about how the
Trump administration is going about it.
Right. They've had some wins that with
cases that began uh long ago with the
Google search case. Uh the Google ad
business case. Uh those were uh federal
judges found uh Google to be monopolist
in those cases. We [clears throat] have
had a settlement with Amazon. Uh a case
against Apple by the DOJ is still
pending. How do you think the Trump
administration is doing?
>> Not unlike many other areas, there's a
lot of strange contradictions in there.
Yeah.
>> Because on the one hand, as you just
described, if you were, I guess, an
outsider and you all your only if you're
an alien, your only source of
information was reading court reports.
You'd say this administration hates big
tech
>> and is pursuing the most aggressive
attacks we've seen since Roosevelt
sailed across or send his ships against
Japan in the Pacific World War. There's,
you know, these m this whole range of of
lawsuits that are designed to break out
big tech and they're being run by very
powerful attorneys. Yet, on the other
hand, the leaders of big tech, you know,
they're at the they're in the
>> the state dining room of the White
House. They're hanging out. You know,
they were there on the deas at the
inauguration.
>> Seems pretty uh chummy.
>> So, there's this total disconnect. My
sense of the Republican base is not fond
of giving tech a you know an easy ride
here and they want to really um bring it
to them. So, the extent that Trump
befriends overly befriends big tech, he
fears enraging his base. So, there's
some limit there. But obviously he sees
the temptation um of their enormous
money and backing. Um I imagine that
it'll be one of these weird compromises
where you do have the lawsuits go
forward, but then um you know they'll
try and extract as much money as they
can from them or uh my worst fear is
that it'll it'll that forces of
corruption will win and some kind of
payoff will will be the way of solving
these lawsuits as opposed to letting
them go forward. Now, we are hardly the
first people to have this discussion, to
have this debate. I mean, it's happening
constantly uh in the face of these
lawsuits, in the face of other actions
by the Trump administration and the
previous administration.
And the argument that always comes up
when we talk about antitrust action
against these uh big companies is number
one there's a whole school of economists
as you know who argue that monopolies
are great because they lead to sort of
maximum uh economic
uh efficacy and so the greatest boon to
GDP you know the greatest boost in uh
employment also that we need national
champions right so I mean isn't it the
case that there are especially in this
era that we live in. Uh some potential
uh positives to these very large
increasingly powerful companies that are
able to take advantage of economies of
scale that are unprecedented that are
able to make long-term investments in
R&D that smaller firms couldn't.
>> There's always arguments that you just
need the big guys. There are our guys.
Um you know, we need to defend our
national champion. It's a battle where
there's just going to be a few winners.
I think the brilliance and genius of
America,
at least until recently, has been to
ignore those arguments and be like, you
know what, we know what's going to
happen in reality. You're going to
become fat and lazy and we're going to
talk about the good old days of Silicon
Valley when they def, you know, depended
on good products to make a buck and now
you depend on defending your monopoly
and government contracting. I mean, I
see a clear path for Silicon Valley to
become Northrup Grunham and like Boeing
and like half a dozen other companies
that became somehow entwined with
government, immune to competition,
inefficient, bloated, and ultimately
bested by other countries. So, you know,
if we're in a competition with China,
for example, um do we want our companies
to face serious domestic competition or
do we want them to sit around and and um
sit on American revenue streams and then
eventually get creamed by China? No, I I
I have very strong feelings about this.
And because I've read enough history to
see that the same arguments are
presented by every generation of tech
leaders, I and because I've also seen
their failure in Japan, Europe, and the
United States, I think it's time we keep
taking those kind of arguments seriously
and realize that competition is much
better industrial policy.
>> Okay. Okay. So, you haven't bought into
uh the optimism the big tech leaders are
putting out there, their vision for the
future, but you are hopeful when it
comes to our technological future,
right?
>> Yes, I am optimistic. I mean, you know,
I do think Silicon Valley has taken a
turn away from its origins in terms of
becoming far more excited about monopoly
and far more excited about government.
But I am ultimately optimistic. I do
think the I mean the platforms are
extraordinary technologies if kept in
their lane. I think they can continue to
empower entrepreneurship. There's still
the most talent here. I just think we
need to get the balance right again and
we've done it before. We have sort of
trimmed the wings of monopouist before
and seen a new generation and frankly
it's a very good time to build. You know
I have friends in small tech and
entrepreneurs. One of the good sides of
open a of AI in general is it reduces
the building costs. You just need room
and you need a sense that if you invest,
there's going to be return on
investment. The the worst thing about
the platform model is the sense that if
you make any if you make a great
product, your proceeds are going to get
taken by somebody else. People who build
their own things need to have confidence
are going to reap what they sow.
Tim Woo, thanks so much for joining us.
>> It's been a great pleasure. Thanks.
>> One last thing, we reached out to Apple,
Meta, Google, Bill Gates, Microsoft,
Sony, Boeing, North of Grumman, and the
Federal Trade Commission. All did not
respond to our requests for comment. We
reached out to the White House and a
spokesman said, quote, "President Trump
pledged to put everyday Americans and
America first." End quote. The spokesman
also said the only special interest
guiding the administration's
decision-making is the quote best
interest of the American people.
>> We reached out to IBM and they declined
to comment.
>> We also reached out to Amazon and a
spokesman disagreed with how Timu
characterized the relationship between
Amazon and its independent sellers. The
spokesman said, quote, "More than 60% of
Amazon sales come from independent
sellers." End quote. and that sellers
choose Amazon because it offers quote
flexibility and value in a highly
competitive retail landscape end quote.